
<div class="main">

# Note of Michael Artin "Algebra" Chapter 2 "Groups"

# 2.1 LAWS OF COMPOSITION

## Def. (Laws of Composition) 

Any rule combining pairs of element of $S$ to get another element of $S$: $S\times S \to S$.

## 2.1.1 Def. (Associative Law) (Skipped)

## 2.1.2 Def. (Commutative Law) (Skipped)

## 2.1.4 Prop. (Associative Law $\Rightarrow$ Product Def.)

$[a_1] = a_1,[a_1a_2] = a_1\times a_2,\forall \text{ integer } i \in [1,n],[a_1\cdots a_n] = [a_1\cdots a_i][a_{i+1}\cdots a_n]$

## 2.1.5 Def. (Identity) 

$ea=a$ and $ae=a,\forall a \in S$

- Left identity and right identity: Something deters whether a semi-group can be a group.(to do)

# 2.2 GROUPS AND SUBGROUPS

## Def. (Group) 

- Associativity, identity, inverse(both left and right) 
- Abelian group (Group + Commutativity)

## 2.2.1 Def. (Order of Group)

$|G|$ = number of elements of $G$.

## 2.2.2 Def. (Familiar Infinite Abelian Groups)

$\mathbb{Z}^+, \mathbb{R}^+, \mathbb{R}^{\times}, \mathbb{C}^+, \mathbb{C}^{\times}$

## 2.2.3 Prop. (Cancellation Law)

If $ab=ac$ or if $ba=ca$, the $b=c$. If $ab=a$ or if $ba=a$, then $b=1$.

## 2.2.4 Def. (General Linear Group)

$GL_n = \left\{ A_{n\times n} | det(A) \neq 0 \right\}$
Working on $\mathbb{R}$ or $\mathbb{C}$, we have $GL_n(\mathbb{R}), GL_n(\mathbb{C})$.

## 2.2.5 Def. (Symmetric Group $S_n$)

$S_n$ is the group of permutations of the set of indices ${1,2,\cdots, n}$.

## 2.2.9 Def. (Subgroup)

$G$ is a group, $H \subset G$ is a subgroup if it has the following properties:

- Closure: If $a$ and $b$ are in $H$, then $ab$ is in $H$.
- Identity: $1$ is in $H$.
- Inverses: If $a$ is in $H$, then $a^{-1}$ is in H. 

## 2.2.10 Example. (Circle Group, Special Linear Group, Trivial Subgroup and Proper Subgroup)

### Circle group

Circle group is $\left\{ x| x\in \mathbb{C}, |x| = 1\right\}$, the set of points on the unit circle in the complex plane, is a subgroup of $\mathbb{C}^{\times}$.

### Special Linear Group $SL_n$

$SL_n(\mathbb{R})$ is the set of real $n\times n$ matrices $A$ with determinant equal to $1$.

### Trivial Subgroup and Proper Subgroup

- Trivial Subgroup: $\left\{ 1 \right\}, G \leq G$
- Proper Subgroup: Subgroups not trivial.

# 2.3 SUBGROUPS OF THE ADDITIVE GROUP OF INTEGERS

## 2.3.1 Def. (Subgroup by additive notation) (Skipped)

## 2.3.2 Notation. ($\mathbb{Z}a$)

$\mathbb{Z}a$ is a subset of $\mathbb{Z}$ that consists of all multiples of $a$ by $\mathbb{Z}a$.

## 2.3.3 Theorem. 

Let $S \leq \mathbb{Z}^+$, then $S$ is trivial or $S = \mathbb{Z}a$, where $a$ is the smallest positive integer in $S$.

## 2.3.4, 2.3.5 Prop. 

$$
S = \mathbb{Z}a + \mathbb{Z}b = \left\{n\in\mathbb{Z} | n=ra+sb \text{ for some integers } r,s \right\} = \mathbb{Z}d, d = \gcd(a,b)
$$

## 2.3.6 Prop. 2.3.8 

$$
\mathbb{Z}a\cap \mathbb{Z}b = \mathbb{Z}m \Rightarrow m = \text{lcm} (a,b)
$$

# 2.4 CYCLIC GROUPS

## 2.4.1 Def. (Cyclic Group)

$x$ is an arbitrary element of $G$, the cyclic group generated by $x$ is $H = \left\{ \cdots, x^{-2}, x^{-1}, 1, x, x^2, \cdots\right\}.$ We have $H \leq G$, and $H$ is the smallest subgroup of $G$ that contains $x$.

## 2.4.2 Prop. 

Let <$x$> be the cyclic subgroup of $G$ generated by $x \in G$, and let $S$ denote the set of integers $k$ such that $x^k = 1$.

- **(a)** The set $S$ is a subgroup of the additive group $\mathbb{Z}$.
- **(b)** Two powers $x^r=x^s$, with $r \geq s$, are equal if and only if $x^{r-s} = 1$, i. e., if and only if $r-s$ is in $S$.
- **(c)** Suppose that $S$ is proper subgroup. Then $S = \mathbb{Z}n$ for some positive integer $n$. The powers $1,x,x^2,\cdots,x^{n-1}$ are the distinct elements of the subgroup <$x$>, and the order of <$x$> is $n$.

The group <$x$> described by part **(c)** is called the **cyclic group of order $n$**. An element $x$ of a group has **order $n$** if $n$ is the smallest positive integer with the property $x^n=1$, which is the same thing as saying that the cyclic subgroup <$x$> generated by $x$ has order $n$.

## 2.4.4 Example. (Klein four group $V$)

$$
V = \left[
\begin{matrix}
\pm 1 &  \\
& \pm 1
\end{matrix}
\right]
$$

$V$ is the simplest group that is not cyclic.

## 2.4.5 Example. (Quaternion group $H$)

$$
H = \left\{ \pm 1, \pm i, \pm j, \pm k\right\}
$$

where
$$
\textbf{1} = \left[
\begin{matrix}
1 & 0\\
0 & 1
\end{matrix}
\right],
\textbf{i} = \left[
\begin{matrix}
i & 0\\
0 & -i
\end{matrix}
\right],
\textbf{j} = \left[
\begin{matrix}
0 & 1\\
-1 & 0
\end{matrix}
\right],
\textbf{k} = \left[
\begin{matrix}
0 & i\\
i & 0
\end{matrix}
\right]
$$
These matrices can be obtained from the **Pauli matrices** of physics by multiplying by $i$.

The two elements $i,j$ generate $H$. $i^2=j^2=k^2=-1, ij=-ji=k, jk=-kj=i, ki=-ik=j$.

# 2.5 HOMOMORPHISMS

## 2.5.1, 2.5.3 Def. (Homomorphism)

A homomorphism $\varphi : G \to G'$ is a map such that $\forall a, b \in G$, $\varphi (ab) = \varphi (a) \varphi (b)$.

Group homomorphism maps product of elements, identity and inverses to themselves.

## 2.5.4, 2.5.5 Def. (Image and Kernel) (Skipped)

## 2.5.6 Example. 

- Kernel of determinant homomorphism: $\textbf{ker}( GL_n ( \mathbb{R}) \to \mathbb{R}^{\times}) = SL_n(\mathbb{R})$
- Kernel of sign homomorphism: $\textbf{ker}(S_n\to \left\{ \pm 1 \right\}) = A_n$
  - The alternating group $A_n$ is the group of even permutations.

## 2.5.7 Def. (Coset) (Skipped)

## 2.5.8 Prop. 

$\varphi:G \to G'$ is homomorphism of groups, $a,b\in G, K = \textbf{ker} \varphi$. Following conditions are equivalent:

- $\varphi(a) = \varphi(b)$
- $a^{-1}b \in K$
- $b \in aK$
- $aK = bK$

## 2.5.10 Def. (Normal Subgroup)

A subgroup $N \leq G$ is a normal subgroup if $\forall a \in N, \forall g \in G, \text{ the conjugate } gag^{-1}\in N$.

## 2.5.11 Prop. 

The kernel of a homomorphism is a normal subgroup.

## 2.5.12 Def. (Group Center)

A group center is the set  of element that commute with every element in $G$.
$$
Z = \left\{ z\in G | zx=xz, \forall x \in G\right \}, Z \trianglelefteq G
$$

# 2.6 ISOMORPHISMS

## 2.6.1 Def. (Isomorphism)

Bijective group homomorphism.

Notation: $G \approx G'$

## 2.6.2 Lemma. 

$\varphi: G \to G'$ is isomorphism $\leftrightarrow \varphi^{-1}: G' \to G$ is isomorphism.

## 2.6.4 Def. (Automorphism) 

$\varphi: G \to G$ is isomorphism. The most important automorphism: Conjugation by $g$ : $\varphi(x) = gxg^{-1}, g, x \in G$

# 2.7 EQUIVALENCE RELATIONS AND PARTITIONS

## 2.7.3 Def. (Equivalence)

$a \sim b, a,b \in S$ requires transitive, symmetric, reflexive.

## 2.7.4 Prop. 

A equivalence relation on a set $S$ determines a partition of $S$, and conversely.
Definition of equivalence class of $a$:
$$
C_a = \left\{ b\in S | a \sim b\right \}
$$

## 2.7.6 Lemma. 

Given an equivalence relation on a set $S$, the subsets of $S$ that are equivalence classes partition $S$.
If $C_a$ and $C_b$ have an element in common, then $C_a = C_b$.
Set $\bar{S}$ contains $S$'s subset elements. If $U\subseteq S$, we denote that $[U] \in \bar{S}$.

## 2.7.11 Def. (Inverse image)

Any map of sets $f:S\to T$ gives us an equivalence relation on $S$: $a\sim b$ if $f(a)=f(b)$.

Definition of inverse image of an element $t$ of $T$:
$$
f^{-1} (t) = \left\{ s \in S | f(s)=t \right\}
$$
$f$ is bijective if and only if $f$ is a map. The inverse images are also called the **fibres** of the map $f$, and the fibres that are not empty are the equivalence classes for the relation defined above.

## 2.7.15 Prop.

Let $K$ be the kernel of a homomorphism $\varphi:G \to G'$. The fibre of $\varphi$ that contains an element $a$ of $G$ is the coset $aK$ of $K$. These cosets partition the group $G$, and they correspond to elements of the image of $\varphi$.

# 2.8 COSETS

## 2.8.1 Def. (Coset)

$$
H \leq G, a \in G, aH = \left\{ ah| h \in H \right \}
$$

The cosets of $H \leq G$ are equivalent classes for the congruence relation $a \equiv b$ if $b=ah, h\in H$.

## 2.8.3 Corollary. 

The left cosets of a subgroup $H \leq G$ partition the group.

The following are equivalent:

- $b=ah$ for some $h\in H$, or, $a^{-1}b \in H$.
- $b \in aH$
- $aH=bH$

## 2.8.6 Def. (Index of Left Cosets)

The number of left cosets of a subgroup is called the index of $H$ in $G$, denoted by $[G:H]$.

## 2.8.7 Lemma. 

All left cosets $aH$ of a subgroup $H$ of a group $G$ have the same order.

## 2.8.8 Corollary. (Counting Formula)

$$
|G| = |H| [G:H]
$$

## 2.8.9 Theorem. (Lagrange's Theorem)

Let H be a subgroup of a finite group G. The order of H divides the order of G.

## 2.8.10 Corollary. 

The order of an element of a finite group divides the order of the group. <$a$> $\leq G, a\in G$ (Prop. 2.4.2)

## 2.8.11 Corollary. 

Suppose that a group $G$ has prime order $p$. Let $a$ be any element of $G$ other than the identity. Then $G$ is the cyclic group <$a$> generated by $a$.

## 2.8.12 Corollary.

Referring to 2.7.15, we can conclude a bijective correspondence with the elements of the image.
$$
[G: \ker \varphi] = |\text{im} \varphi|
$$

## 2.8.13 Corollary. 

Let $\varphi: G \to G'$ be a homomorphism of finite groups. Then

- $|G| = |\ker\varphi | \cdot |\text{im} \varphi|$
- $|\ker\varphi |$ divides $|G|$, and
- $|\text{im}\varphi|$ divides both $|G|$ and $|G'|$.

## 2.8.14 Prop. (Multiplicative Property of the Index)

Let $G\supset H \supset K$ be subgroups of a group $G$. Then $[G:K]=[G:H][H:K]$.

## 2.8.15 Def. (Right Cosets) 

The partitions of right cosets of a subgroup of a group are not the same as those of the left cosets. However, if a subgroup is normal, the right coset is equal to the left coset.

## 2.8.17 Prop.

Let $H$ be a subgroup of a group $G$. The following conditions are equivalent:

- **(i)** $H$ is a normal subgroup: $\forall h \in H$ and all $g\in G$, $ghg^{-1}$ is in $H$.
- **(ii)** $\forall g\in G, gHg^{-1} = H$.
- **(iii)** $\forall g \in G, gH = Hg$.
- **(iv)** Every left coset $H\leq G$ is a right coset.
  The circumstance of the left coset be equal to the right coset: Let $H\leq G$, $g \in gH \cap Hg$, and the right coset partition the group $G$, therefore if the left coset $gH$ is equal to any right coset, that coset must be $Hg$.

## 2.8.18 Prop.

- **(a)** If $H$ is a subgroup of a group and $g$ is an element of $G$, the set $gHg^{-1}$ is also a subgroup.
- **(b)** If a group $G$ has just one subgroup $H$ of order $r$, then that subgroup is normal.

# 2.9 MODULAR ARITHMETIC

## 2.9.1 Def. (Congruent modulo $n$) (Skipped)

## 2.9.7 Notation. (The Set of Congruence Classes Module $n$)

$$
\mathbb{Z/Z}n,\mathbb{Z}/n\mathbb{Z},\mathbb{Z}/(n),
$$

# 2.10 THE CORRESPENDENCE THEOREM

## 2.10.1 Notation. (Restrict)

Let $\varphi: G \to \mathcal{G}$ be a group homomorphism, and let $H \leq G$. We may **restrict** $\varphi$ to $H$, obtaining a homomorphism
$$
\varphi |_{H} :H \to \mathcal{G}.
$$
We have 
$$
\ker(\varphi|_{H}) = (\ker \varphi) \cup H. (2.10.2)
$$

## 2.10.4 Prop.

Let $\varphi:G\to \mathcal{G}$ be a homomorphism, $K = \ker \varphi$, $\mathcal{H} \leq \mathcal{G}$. Denote the inverse image $\varphi^{-1}(\mathcal{H})$ by $H$. Then $K \subset H \leq G$.
If $\mathcal{H} \unlhd \mathcal{G}$, then $H \unlhd G$. 
If $\varphi$ is surjective and $H \unlhd G$, then $\mathcal{H} \unlhd \mathcal{G}$.

## 2.10.5 Theorem. (Correspondence Theorem) 

Let $\varphi:G \to G'$ be a **surjective** group homomorphism, $K = \ker \varphi$, then 
$$
\{ \text{subgroups of } G \text{ that contains } K \} \leftrightarrow \{ \text{subgroups of }G \}
$$

# 2.11 PRODUCT GROUPS

## 2.11.1 Def. (Product of Group)

Let $G$, $G'$ be groups. The product set $G\times G' = (a, a') , a\in G, a'\in G'$. The multiplication rule is defined as:
$$
(a, a')\cdot(b, b') = (ab, a'b')
$$

## 2.11.3 Prop.

Let $r$ and $s$ be relatively prime integers. A cyclic group of order $rs$ is isomorphic to the product of a cyclic group of order $r$ and a cyclic group of order $s$.

## 2.11.4 Prop. (Product Groups)

Let $H, K \leq G$, the multiplication map $f: H\times K \to G$, defined by $f(h,k)=hk)$. Its image is the set $HK=\{hk|h\in H, k\in K\}$.

- **(a)** $f$ is injective if and only if $H\cup K = \{1\}$.
- **(b)** $f$ is a homomorphism from the product group $H\times K$ to $G$ if and only if $hk=kh$. **(It may not be a homomorphism!)**
- **(c)** If $H\unlhd G$, then $HK \leq G$.
- **(d)** $f$ is an isomorphism from the product group $H\times K$ to $G$ if and only if $H\cup K = \{1\}$, $HK=G$, and also $H, K \unlhd G$.

## 2.11.5 Prop.

There are 2 isomorphism classes of groups of order 4, the class of cyclic group $C_4$ of order 4 and the class of the Klein Four Group, which is isomorphic to $C_2\times C_2$.

# 2.12 QUOTIENT GROUPS 

## 2.12.1 Def. (Quotient Groups)

The set of cosets of a **normal** subgroup $N$ of a group $G$ is often denoted by $G/N$.

Let $C \in G/N$, $[C]$ is used to denote the coset. If $C=aN$, we can denote $\bar{a} = [C]$, $\bar{G} = G / N$.

## 2.12.2 Theorem. 

Let $N \unlhd G$, $\bar{G} = G/N$. There is a law of composition on $\bar{G}$ that makes this set into a group, $\pi : G\to G'$ defined by $\pi(a)=\bar{a}$ is a surjective homomorphism, and $\ker \pi = N$.

- The map $\pi$ is often referred to as the **canonical map** from $G$ to $G'$. 'Canonical' indicates that this is the only map that we might reasonably be talking about.

## 2.12.3 Corollary.

Let $N \unlhd G$, and let $\bar{G} \in G/N$. Let $\pi : G \to \bar{G}$ be the canonical homomorphism. Let $a_1,\cdots,a_n$ be elements of $G$ such that the product $a_1\cdots a_k \in N$. Then $\bar{a_1}\cdots \bar{a_k} = \bar{1}$.

## 2.12.5 Lemma.

Let $N \unlhd G$, the product $(aN)(bN)$ is also a coset, and it is equal to the coset $abN$.

This lemma allows us to define multiplication on the set $\bar{G} = G/N$. If $C_1$ and $C_2$ are cosets, then $[C_1][C_2] = [C_1C_2]$.

## 2.12.8 Lemma.

Let $G$ be a group, and let $Y$ be a set with a law of composition. Let $\varphi: G\to Y$ be a surjective map with the homomorphism property, that $\varphi(a)\varphi(b) = \varphi(ab), \forall a,b \in G$. Then $Y$ is a group and $\varphi$ is a homomorphism.

## 2.12.10 Theorem. (First Isomorphism Theorem)

Let $\varphi:G \to G'$ be a surjective group homomorphism with kernel $N$. The quotient group $\bar{G} = G/N$ is isomorphic to the image $G'$. To be precise, let $\pi:G\to G'$ be the canonical map. There is a unique isomorphism $\bar{\varphi}: \bar{G} \to G'$ such that $\varphi = \bar{\varphi} \circ \pi$.

</div>